have you ever heard the term tip of the
iceberg
you know that icebergs are mostly
underwater their immense bulk hidden
beneath the water but why is that so
well
the density of pure ice is less than
that of seawater usually only one ninth
of the volume of an iceberg is above the
water the shape of the underwater
portion is difficult to discern by
looking at the above surface portion
this has led to the expression tip of
the iceberg here are some things you
might not know about the icy islands the
life of an iceberg begins many thousands
of years before it reaches the ocean
unlike sea ice or pack ice which form
when the ocean freezes glaciers are made
of fresh water for thousands of years
these glaciers build layer upon layer of
ice constantly compressing moving adding
snow compressing and moving again as
they inch along like a frozen river it
is the force of gravity that pulls them
towards the sea where a glacier may have
off to become an iceberg or continue to
spread out as an ice shelf or an ice
tongue once an iceberg breaks away from
the glacier or ice shelf it will usually
live for three to six years floating
around carried by the currents and tidal
movements of the ocean as it floats
along it is battered by waves melts and
smashes into land and sometimes other
icebergs some icebergs are so unstable
that they have more dramatic ends
heaving up collapsing and sometimes even
exploding and as they fall apart
many icebergs make all sorts of strange
sounds when a piece of iceberg melts it
makes a fizzing sound called Bergy
seltzer this sound is made when the
water ice interface reaches compressed
air bubbles trapped in the ice as this
happens each bubble bursts making a
popping sound there are six official
sized classifications for icebergs the
smallest icebergs are called growlers
they can be up to the size of your car
and are very dangerous for ships and
boats because usually they sit just at
the waterline where they're not easy to
spot next are the Bergy bits yes that is
their scientific name which can be up to
the size of your home the other four
sizes are small medium large and very
large so just how big is a very
our iceberg officially any iceberg
looming larger than 270 feet high
above sea level and 670 feet long is
considered very large that's 27 stories
of looming blue ice and how do icebergs
get that blue color anyways when snow on
the glacier is compressed over many
hundreds of years the weight of the snow
forces the air bubbles out of the ice
creating pure ice with very little air
trapped inside this compression is seen
when the glacier calves creating a blue
iceberg an iceberg that is not
experienced as much compression and has
a large amount of air and surface edges
reflects light as white although they
form in far northern or southern areas
icebergs can float thousands of miles an
iceberg from the Arctic floated as far
south as Bermuda Antarctic icebergs are
mostly trapped in the circumpolar
current never giving them a chance to
float north however they have been known
to interrupt shipping lanes between
Australia South America and South Africa
for all their traveling many people
think that these slabs of ice are barren
of life but these seemingly sterile ice
slabs also Harbor their own complex
ecosystems and they shape the ecosystems
that they pass through they become
mobile floating ecosystems even in the
coldest seas icebergs are always melting
at least a little bit this melting has a
major impact on the ocean around an
iceberg the fresh water from the Berg
creates a pool of fresh water that can
extend a nautical mile away from the
iceberg
this water is colder than the
surrounding seawater and the temperature
variation creates thermal currents in
the vicinity of the iceberg life thrives
on and around an iceberg young ice fish
hide in small ice holes to avoid
predators while a variety of
invertebrates like jellyfish and
siphonophores congregate in the area
many of them come to feed on krill tiny
shrimp-like creatures snow petrels nest
on the icebergs and feed on the sea life
nearby whales and seals and penguins
seem to like them too
and even now that you know all this
we're still at the tip of the iceberg
there are all sorts of things we don't
know about icebergs perhaps you'll be
the one to see a little deeper